All right.
Nice to meet you.
Good to meet you.
That's actually funny.
It works.
I believe you.
And pointed to you.
I have to say, starting this book, I'm a little jarred by the male voice.
Are you unaccustomed to a male voice, isn't it?
No, because I don't know who the author is.
Oh.
I was very clever about this, because most authors like to put their... Did you notice?
I did not have my name anywhere on the inside.
I didn't notice that.
That was an intentional Philip to help the reader suspend belief.
I mean, I wanted this to be Noah's book.
And then if they looked up and saw Marianne Wiggins running across the top of the page... Continually.
Yeah, so I made that...
You were fearful then that the reader might have it?
No, I don't think fear was the motivation necessarily, but care.
I didn't want any detail.
I was planning a perfect feat.
You did it within the first graph or so, a paragraph.
Well, I had a very good friend, male friend, read the manuscript when it was finished to let me know.
Although, you know, I have vast experience with the opposite sex in terms of how they think and what they do.
I was worried that I might have, I mean, I don't think Noah is particularly blokey enough, for example.
There's not a single mention of sports in this.
And I asked Rick to look at this, and he said, you know, I thought he was a real asshole.
I had grown very fond of him.
So I thought, okay.
Well, that's good, though.
You wanted that.
Yeah, yeah, I did.
Was this the artistic challenge for you to do this in the voiceover?
No.
So what were the artistic challenges?
No, that wasn't the challenge.
And in fact, where I think the voice fails...
is that Noah, any journalist will tell you, Noah's not a journalist.
He doesn't think like a journalist.
He thinks like a novelist.
He doesn't write like a journalist.
He writes like a poet.
And my severe complaint with him was that I always felt that he wasn't as good a writer as I am.
So I was having to pull back and not... That's why I have him always complaining that he isn't allowed to wax poetic.
Because I was dying to do that
And I knew that he wouldn't.
And he doesn't go subject, predicate, subject, predicate.
You know, he doesn't drive the way that his prose, the way that a trained journalist would do.
So that was really the artistic challenge.
Not the gender.
The gender was never an issue because I've read boys' books from the time I was reading.
I mean, I just moved the gender... I just twisted Moby Dick a little this way and moved Ahab into something that I could understand.
Well...
But nevertheless, from the standpoint of being the writer, to create kind of this male sexual creature?
I think the difficulty in writing, in cross-gender writing, is to avoid the pitfall of writing through the anatomy.
And in the beginning, I think I was a little too conscious of the difference anatomy would make.
I mean, he gets an erection in the back of a taxi on page, what, 17?
Real, real fast.
Real fast, we're writing anatomy.
And I thought, you know, I don't want to play it that way from here, you know, through the rest of the book.
And, not to give the plot away, as you know, if you've read the book... Did you finish reading the book?
You have to forgive me.
I've had four interviews this week, so I'm... But there is a...
Anatomy plays a major part in Berlin.
And so I had to play that very, very, very carefully and not depend on anatomical dictates, but to depend on the commonality of the sexes.
I mean, there are a number of my male friends that I talk to the same way I talk to my best female friends.
And I find them sensitive and caring and loving and
The gender was not the artistic challenge.
Well, you say, don't worry about giving it away, by the way, because I am professional enough to, I won't let that bother me.
So if you want to talk about the novel, that's fine.
Okay.
I promise you I will complete it.
No, I trust you, I trust you.
I don't write these stories unless I have.
No, what I was referring to is that they were, and I don't want to ruin it for,
You know, you were other readers, but there is a rape scene.
And that was very difficult to write.
Was that part of the original scheme?
Oh, absolutely.
So you had this thing pretty well figured out.
I'm a lazy writer.
I don't like doing second, third, and fourth drafts.
I find that tedium beyond belief.
So I don't even start until every day.
Yeah.
Really?
It drives my students crazy because they want to kill me because I'm always making them go back and do it and do it.
But temperamentally, I would rather hold it all together in my mind for four or five years and go through.
Because I write longhand, and so I create, it's a messy process to do rewrites.
So is 1989 just happens to be when you started writing the book?
No, I had to wait for all of that to filter down.
I really only started it about a year and a half ago.
Well, you mentioned five years.
Well, yeah, and it's been longer than that.
I finished John Dollar in 1988, and then I did a collection of short stories, so it takes a long time.
And I also had started a novel, which I realized,
I wasn't meant to write.
Did you throw it away or just put it aside?
Well, oh, I don't ever put anything into the fire.
I just put it into the bottomless pit of the bottom drawer.
I tell my students as well, nothing is ever wasted, and the characters may re-emerge.
It was an 18th century novel about the writing of the Bill of Rights, and with everything that's going on in our life now,
I thought, you know, if I want to write an 18th century novel, it'll wait.
You know, the 18th century isn't going to go away.
Nothing's going to change about it.
It's already committed itself to posterity.
Well, it's a different take on it, though.
Yeah.
Journalism.
Why journalism here?
Because I became... Is it a metaphor for anything?
I think journalism is, if anything, things are metaphors for journalism, including post-journalism.
Um...
Because in February 1989, I became the news by virtue of the fact that I was married to Solomon Rushdie.
I'm glad you brought it up about me.
And I felt much abused by the press.
And I felt that the press, particularly in England, had an attitude of its expectations of me that it created a version of me which was
neither me nor even an approximation of what we were living through.
Also, I felt that the press served Salman very badly.
I mean, the week after the fatwa, his picture had been on the front page of every major newspaper, and people who had never heard of him to say nothing, to say no less than had never seen him, suddenly knew what, you know, people in Idaho knew what he looked like.
And this is a man who
whose life depends on his anonymity at this point.
And I think it was immoral for the press to have done that.
I think some editor somewhere should have said, my God, this man has been condemned to death.
Let's do everything we can to protect his anonymity.
You say some editor, but of course there were hundreds of editors making the same decisions.
Oh, I knew that.
I mean, and not one of them spiked his picture.
I mean, if anything, it was everywhere.
And now, I mean, I think you could...
If a picture of Salman were to appear on the screen, you would know him.
You would identify him.
I think this is really immoral.
I think that you've sort of taken a man who desperately needs to be able to pass through society without notice and made him an unnoticeable object.
abandoned the 18th century novel and thought, I really want to write something about what's happened to the... So this is a response to that experience?
Yeah.
I thought, going in with a point of view, that I was angry, and I was really going to show the press.
Boy, I was going to write a scathing denunciation of what the press has become.
And when I started to talk to journalists, my respect and admiration...
glued to them beyond measure.
Oh, beyond measure up.
And I find that... Was that totally unexpected for you?
Yeah, well, I chose... I mean, I acknowledge the journalists who helped me with this book in the beginning of the book.
And I didn't speak to people who write the tabloids.
I was fortunate enough to get to know and speak to people who worked for National Public Radio, the Washington Post, the New York Times.
You know, the broadsheets that are really...
Class sheet.
And so I spoke to really hardworking, well-respected journalists and came around to thinking that they really are front line.
You're talking about, but basically you're also talking about the people in the trenches, so to speak, and not the people back there.
home, making the decisions as to what picture goes above the fold.
No, I actually didn't speak to any editorial people, because I wasn't writing about an editor.
You know, I was writing about... But you weren't that interested in the... In the politics of it.
The total process.
No, because that's... I mean, I'm not, and maybe I will in future books, because that is one of the frustrations for the front-line people.
So you think you will continue to write about that?
This is the first of a trilogy.
Oh, I didn't know that.
There are two books to follow because at the end of this book, our star-crossed lovers have to disappear because one of them has implicated herself in a murder.
They can either fess up and face the charges, or they can do what a great many number of people are doing, and that is go off the grid and go into hiding.
You are pulling this from real life, aren't you?
I am, and I'm not, because also, look, I'm bringing them back to the United States.
Some may go into hiding out in South Dakota.
I just was out in the Badlands all of last week.
You came back to the United States.
Because I needed work, Nick.
I couldn't work in England.
I came back to teach here.
But the militia are going off the grid.
I mean, it's something that... Yes, I have... I'm pulling from real life, but also I'm addressing what is an emerging movement in the United States.
And they end up... Noah and Lilith end up five miles down the road from another Waco situation and are drawn inexorably back into being journalists.
And that's where the second book is.
And it also explores underground movements in the USA...
It takes place right at the borderlines of the Badlands and the Pine Ridge Reservation, which is every year the poorest county in the United States.
So I get to write about Native Americans.
I get to write about...
I get to write about fundamentalists.
I get to write about militiamen.
I get to write about gun control.
I mean, the second of this— But you're becoming something of a journalist in your own right.
I mean, these are issues that go beyond writing fiction.
I think that that's an obligation.
I'm not kind of prose writer.
All my books have hung on political issues, one way or the other.
I write novels of ideas.
I don't write novels of discovery or writes of passion.
Yeah, but you also paid... They are... I don't mean to use the word dated because... But, you know, you've set this around the complex of events.
Yeah, and I think... Well, I think 1989 is a bit... Posterity will judge, but I really do think that it's not going to be... Like a 68 almost.
Yeah, it's going to be...
a term that refers to an entire movement.
Like back in 68.
Yeah, or 1492.
You don't think of it as being... That's right.
But even within our own compass, remembering 68... 68 means you remember Paris, you remember things that happened on the street here, you remember everything, sweeping, sweeping here.
Bobby Kennedy, Martin Luther King... Brings it all up.
...all these things, you know, in Vietnam and Kent State, all these things in 68.
I'm sorry to go off on that.
So will the succeeding volumes of the trilogy be narrated by this name?
No.
This one, really good question, because one thing that writing a novel teaches you is how to write
how you should have written it.
Too late.
Well, maybe a second draft.
I know, that's right.
I don't want to do that, so I'll just write another one.
I'll turn it into a sequel.
But I had to... I wanted to write in the first person, because it's also a book about obsessive love.
As much as it's about politics in 1989, it's also about love and the banality of evil.
And I wanted to write very intimately and obsessively about obsessive love.
And so that limited it to either writing from one of the two obsessives' point of view.
And I somehow wasn't comfortable with writing from the female point of view because it's not Lilith's book.
She's objectified through the man who's obsessively in love with her, through Noah.
And so consequently, by the end of the book, we still don't know very much about her except that
He's obsessed with her and would do anything for her.
And it's limiting what I could do.
I could never get really into her head.
Well, the first person does do that.
But we know Noah.
I mean, Noah is always right here at our ear whispering the book into our minds.
And so at the end of Iblis Eden, I said, you know, thank you very much, Noah John, but I don't want to be you anymore.
So the second book is told in that.
And my favorite voice, The Omnit,
and allows me... You don't like him anymore.
Oh, no, I love him desperately, but I can't tell the next part of the story through his eyes because it involves two other characters from this book that I must get inside.
So it will be narrated, however?
By the omnipotent narrator.
Oh, so it'll be third person, then.
It's definitely third person.
And then the third book will be told by Lewis.
That works.
I see that.
Yeah, I can see that.
Because I have a bracket in it, and if I knock wood, it'll last long enough.
Well, will you have a denouement?
Will there be a resolution in the third volume?
Will they all be in volume three?
Do you see that far ahead?
That far ahead I don't see, because there's this motif in the beginning of Eveless Eden that one train may hide another.
And until I get over the second one, I mean, I've got this mountain to come up.
I'm not really seeing the third one clearly enough.
That clearly, to me, I mean, in the very first page, is that this is a phrase that we're going to see repeatedly.
Yeah, and you do.
I'm sure you do.
And here I am using it.
Not only here, obviously, but...
And two succeeding volumes, right?
Yeah.
Interesting.
Because I didn't know that this was going to happen until... You didn't conceive of a trilogy?
Not originally.
So you thought this would... This would pretty much tie it all up.
And then I realized it doesn't.
At what point do you realize that?
I realized it at the day no more.
I realized it about two-thirds of the way through.
I'm never going to have enough time to do it.
It's impossible.
I can either write an 100-page book or I can deliver on time and turn it into a trilogy.
And also characters came out.
I didn't really know that there were two supporting characters in this book who become pivotal to the story, to the succeeding story.
They announce themselves to you?
They really did.
They say, you're not done with me.
Yeah, it's not like I open the closet and they go, ah!
No.
But they have become necessary for the resolution to take place that needs to take place.
The ultimate resolution.
And how far forward in time do you expect to come?
I'll probably go... Well, I don't know...
What's going to happen is that I'm writing on the cusp of events.
So whenever I finish the book, and I don't write science fiction, I write into the future.
So you're almost like a jazz musician.
You will improvise it.
As long as a piece of string, yeah.
And what my heartbeat is.
That's cool.
I like that.
To follow that out.
So as things happen... They'll go into the book.
You reserve...
I mean, if suddenly there's a, you know, if suddenly there's a militia of Michigan take over the state capital, I mean, clearly that's going to be an important part, because I'm writing about militias.
But, I mean, this train sabotage thing was just a couple of days ago.
I'm sure you're alert to that.
I know, but they haven't, yeah, they haven't pinned that down.
Yeah, but it's interesting.
What's interesting is they're checking the mailing list of a magazine.
Yep.
There's such a story, you know...
I think they've solved my own sense of investigative procedures.
These people are as smart as they think they are.
I don't mean to go off on that.
No, I know, but that's frightening because the same thing can usually be said of politicians.
But you're alert to things like this.
Oh, I think that, you know, Vonnegut said that the writers are the canaries in the miner's cage that were the first to die if there was methane gas loose in the shaft.
And I think anticipating where history is going is part of the gamble and, for me, part of the excitement.
Because I did write a book that was set in 1917 and realized the frustrations of writing period pieces, that I had to be very, very careful that I wasn't including anachronisms
that the language couldn't be riffy and jazzy and modern.
And I can be a funny person.
I have to try to be grown up most of the time, not the funny person that I naturally am.
And I find it easier to write in present time, in real time.
at least I'm having an awful lot of fun for the foreseeable future, and then I can always go back to the 18th century.
Talk to me a little bit about the biblical... Allusions.
Allusions.
Well, Bible stories were my first myth.
My father was a fundamentalist Christian.
Oh, great.
Oh, you're from Pennsylvania, right?
Lancaster.
Yeah.
And my mother is Greek Orthodox.
And I'm Greek Orthodox.
Hey!
Vesbanes.
Vesbanes is a Greek name, of course.
I read that in your PW interview, as a matter of fact.
I had something to talk about at some point.
Golly, that was a long time ago.
Who did that?
Michelle Field did that, didn't she?
Yeah, I keep a photo.
I was hoping to talk to you in Greek.
In Greek, I couldn't do it.
My daughter is my Greek, thank goodness.
But anyway, I'm sorry.
You're talking about your fundamentalist.
Yeah, well, I never came.
Well, a lot of things.
I was supposed to interview Salman on the Santa Claus system.
I still have the file on that.
That's very collectible, isn't it?
Well, he'd appreciate it.
You should do it.
Yes, so I had these two alternate... Fundamentalist's file and background Bible stories.
And the panagia.
So I had all of this kind of... You said that very well, yeah.
So I think that I keep going back to those references.
And I never was comfortable with The Myth of Ede.
And I think if you'd ask your daughters, they'd tell you the same thing.
I mean, I chaped against that mantle of responsibility for tempting Adam to eat of the fruit.
You know, give me a break.
And at a certain point, I can't even remember when, I found it exhilarating when I stumbled on the Talmudic reference to Lilith that there had been a woman before Eve who was not blonde and not passive.
but was a dark, ferocious kind of equal to Adam.
And the legend is, Adam said, wait a minute.
This isn't going to work.
This is Agno.
This is not what I had in mind.
You put me in Eden and then you give me this.
I want a shiksa.
Give me something blonde, please.
And so Lilith was banished to a cave by the seaside.
And the myth is that she still can steal the souls of young male children.
It's a great myth.
Oh, it's terrific stuff.
Where's that book been all these years?
In the Talmud.
What a great literary... Yeah, it's irresistible.
I think the only reason that most people know the name is that there is a character on Cheers.
who was a dark-haired, ball-busting psychoanalist.
All the Liliths are these kind of ball-busting women.
And I suppose, to a certain extent, my Lilith is very daunting because she's ferocious and brave and takes a lot of risks and incomparable at her job and puts her job before...
her heart, which is not the accepted cultural reference for women.
With all of these little things in place, what I like to do is to take archetypes or archetypal narratives
And lay down layers and layers and layers and layers.
So as the reader is reading, these little mind explosions are going off because you've got all of these references and the written word now has been recorded and anthologized for 2,000, 4,000 years.
So we can go back and load every sentence with a cultural reference.
And I think this not only places the reader in the intimate act of reading, but also places the reader in time.
So that if you cite historical references, you're placing the reader in space and time, and yet freeing the mind.
And it's just part of the beauty of writing.
And if I know enough stories,
about history and if I know enough about legends.
I love planting, you know, double entendre, triple entendre if I can.
I think that that's, you know, that's the monkey puzzle of it.
That's the fun of it.
You don't see the novel as any kind of a fable or anything like that.
Sure, all novels, all stories are, to a certain extent, fabulous.
Or not.
I mean, Brett Easton Ellis is still, you know, who writes fables.
even if he's writing at, you know, zero gravity.
It's just, no, it's not a reinvention.
And I think of all writers.
I mean, Shakespeare rewrote all those old stories.
We've been doing it forever.
Well, you know, I have a book, Saxo Germanicus.
You know, he is.
He wrote the original.
It was a Hamlet 50 years before the Hamlet.
Before the Hamlet.
And so...
It's basically a revenge play, which is what Hamlet is.
She took a play that wasn't even 30 or 40 years old and did a re-spin of it.
Postmodern.
That's right.
That's exactly right.
How do you write?
Do you write a word processor, a longhand?
Lucky pen.
Really?
No, I'm not a mot blanc.
I'm a waterman.
Oh, that's a waterman.
Yeah.
which I've been using ever since I lived in Paris.
I lost my train of thought there, Nick.
That's okay.
I went in my mind to Paris, and then I thought, oh, I would very much rather be in Paris than along the Charleston.
But what was the question?
I don't know.
You were writing in longhand, that's right.
Actually, as I'm writing the book, I'm creating the book.
I'm creating a novel of my own, because I write in big notebooks.
Mm-hmm.
And it's really one shot.
It's one shot.
I mean, you know, there's daily revisions, but it's one.
And then when I move to the typewriter, I polish.
Well, that's a second graph.
Is it?
Well, there's a variant.
It's refining.
Yeah, it's refining.
If we were to examine the text of the manuscript to the typescript, there would be differences?
There would be line editing, but not...
Not structural assumptions and things?
No, no.
In fact, I don't.
I don't do very much of that at all.
I don't take a wrong turn.
I mean, this book is structured in six concise pieces.
I knew I wanted a photograph at the beginning of every chapter, which you noticed.
They did very nicely for me.
They found those for you?
Oh, no, they're mine.
Four of them are mine, and two of them are my daughter's.
My daughter is a professional photographer.
Oh, great.
And we were going to actually make them, pretend them to be Liliths, and we were going to use an Agence France-Presse logo here, but Agence France-Presse wouldn't let us do it, and it just got too complicated.
And also, she's a better photographer than I am, so we didn't credit them at all.
But I wanted, I mean, I take... It makes sense that they were Liliths, isn't that funny?
Oh, ah, you bought it.
Yeah.
Good.
I mean, that's the whole point.
It just makes sense.
Yeah.
I think that's the idea.
And I happen to have been lucky enough.
I mean, that's my photograph of the wall.
I happen to have been there.
Not happened.
I went.
I mean, why else are they there?
It makes sense to me that that's why we have these photographs here.
She's a photographer.
Absolutely.
So, I mean, I take really special care.
And even when I was in my notebook, I had running heads.
I've put running heads at the top of every page here, too.
You're kidding.
I've never heard of anybody that does that.
You're pointing heads in your notebook.
Yeah.
I planned the book to look like this.
So the physical notebook has... You actually are visualizing the printed book.
Obviously, it didn't work out that way because the print is different than my manuscript page and is different than the type page.
But I mean, you've had it.
Yeah.
Because I...
Because I'm such a perfectionist when it comes to creating that whole world of the novel.
And I really wanted this to be a feast for the reader in every way, including the trim size.
I'm not crazy about this cover.
I think it's a little harsh.
Well, but it also gives you an image of the woman that maybe you weren't
But that's so not like her.
So you don't see her?
That's not how you see her?
No, she would never wear lipstick.
She would never, ever.
Well, did you complain?
You know, when it comes to doing the covers, I think that that's where the book people know more than me.
I mean, that's their business.
I'm on the inside.
That's my business.
But when it comes to the rap, they do hundreds of these a year.
They know... There's been marketing studies.
Yeah, so I...
You know, I'm a little outclassed when it comes to that.
And maybe they know something we don't know about lipstick.
Women without lipstick on covers maybe... So I always capitulate.
I always ask for cover approval.
But I think they know what they're doing better than I do.
I think if I were to attempt to design the outside of a book, I'd be a massive failure.
I have to say, I don't want to talk about my own book, which is out now, but I absolutely picked the art for the cover.
Did you?
Tell me.
I do have a computer, which I use for script writing or for nonfiction.
But I need, and I also write with an ink pen.
on heavy paper.
I mean, I need that.
Oh, there's a tactile thing for you.
Yeah, there's a tactile thing.
Really, you do feel it.
And I don't feel it, particularly the little clip.
I have a laptop.
You don't feel anything.
You don't feel the words coming out.
And so I need to, and listen, it's worked.
I've written seven books.
Why mess with it?
I don't remember when Updike, remember when Updike, I remember.
It's like something that occurred in my life.
Updike moved to computers, and all of a sudden,
He seemed to be writing more, which was a joy.
I mean, let's face it.
But he did!
Books get longer, I think.
But the awful thing is a lot of bad not-updyke writers are writing more, too, because of the ease of... It's so easy to insert things, to move things around.
I mean, change.
And I'm a perfectionist.
If a page has a mistake on it, I'll throw it away.
I like clean copy.
But with the computer, you can make your corrections.
And there's no way of knowing how many drafts there are, you know, because you do that.
Well, that's the other thing.
I mean, I can see, the poem says, I can see the cross out.
If you've been to, I don't know if you've been to London, but the British Museum has the manuscript room.
It's in my book.
I describe it.
Of course.
Of course you would.
I describe, you know, and I go to that,
case one where you have the Beowulf and the, you know, that was just saved by a guy.
Why do you take the magnifying glass?
I mean, you can see the thought process.
Well, while you're here, you should really try to get over to Harvard at the Houghton Library where they have a Keats exhibition.
And to see, I get the greatest kick out of seeing, unfortunately, looking at the chaplain's home with his hand.
You know, I mean, I do get it.
You get the same thing in the British Library when you see these manuscripts.
I think that's what you were talking about there.
And you can read, you can hear the rhythm of the line being created.
And that's maybe old-fashioned.
It certainly is not an efficient use of time.
I think for you it is, though.
For me it is.
I mean, if you do it once through, it's...
Well, what's a good day for you?
Do you count words?
Do you impose?
No, that's a guy thing.
See, I do.
I have to, because I'm an old newspaper man.
And I need deadlines.
You know, that explains to me, because I always thought Hemingway did it because he was desperate to continue.
to convince himself that he was still virile and productive.
I mean, he was standing up and counting words, and sometimes there were only 500 words at the end of the day.
And he would make it a heroic thing.
Oh, see, that's the difference between... The computer will count for you.
I'll tell you precisely how many you've done.
And depending on how cramped my handwriting is, I mean, I have a sense of...
Well, a number of pages, you must have an idea of how many pages you've done.
A day isn't necessarily the number of pages, but the sense of a completed scene, or knowing that sometimes scenes take a week or more to write, or the sense that the scene is progressing, it's taking shape in the manner in which I...
I mean, it's a much more subtle sense of accomplishment than a, you know, a qualitative one as opposed to a quantitative one.
Do you wake up in the morning with solutions to puzzles?
It happens in my sleep.
That's what I'm saying, but do you actually do... If I've got, yeah, if I've got, I don't dream, but if I, because I think I have such, I have a such richly waking dream life that I probably, I mean, I don't dream unless I,
This last week, I was on the road so much in South Dakota, I found that I was having processing.
South Dakota?
Yeah, I was in the Badlands researching this.
Oh, say that on tour.
No, no, no.
I didn't like the tour without the South Dakota.
Marianne Wiggins appearing at Wall Drug.
No.
Okay, all right.
I work out, I've been fortunate in that way, and another reason my students
want to kill me, is that I know if I've got a problem, I can pretty much count on it being worked out when I wake in the morning or within 48 hours, if it's just a technical problem.
My morning is the best time to work.
See, I have to impose it.
It's a guy thing.
It really is, I guess, but it's also a... Well, no, you answered it.
It's a much more journalist thing than a guy thing, and I'm glad that... I think it was a really prejudicial point of view.
It does not work with any number of women who really have to have that sense of deadline, and it really does force me... I wish I did.
See, I do a column every week.
I've got about 25 papers to take it, which is nice, and I put this little syndicate together myself...
And my wife goes nuts.
She says, why can't you get ahead?
Why can't you get one ahead?
And why do we always have to do this Tuesday morning?
You know, the first one is due at noon on Tuesday.
Why are you always pushing it to 5 to 12?
I say, it's my best stuff.
I mean, it can't be your best stuff.
It is my best stuff.
But for some reason, you know, I start to get nervous about 9, 9.30 in the morning.
I work on it.
Of course, I've already transcribed the tapes, and I've read the books by this time, and I know what I'm doing.
But for some reason, I love this exploration of how that works.
I just like to sweat a little bit.
Physically, I feel it.
For me, it is chilling.
It immobilizes me.
Maybe this is my particular problem with authority.
I don't keep deadlines.
I do everything.
I paint the house.
I vacuum.
I decide to take off macrame.
I do everything, but I'm going to miss that deadline, and I'm going to fuck authority, and I'm going to just say no, and all of that.
I'm always late.
I'm always in time.
I hate to be late.
I have friends who consistently get work.
Because they meet their deadlines.
And I have this terrible reputation that you're going to get this, you know, really beautifully written piece, but, you know, like six months after it was due.
When it's ready.
Yeah.
No story before it's time, right?
And I would much rather be of your ilk.
It's just discipline, I guess.
But, you know, you're a fiction writer, and I'm a non-fiction writer, too.
And I think that that shows... I think that the beginnings show... I mean, a lot of people... Faye Weldon used to work in advertising, as did Salman.
And I think their ability to find the catchphrase, the pun...
shows, I mean, I think they came, not, I mean, there's no denigration attached to that, but I think that where you used to work sort of comes through.
One thing I've taught myself since I left, because I don't work for a newspaper, so I have to set up my own arbitrary artificial deadlines, but they work for me, you know, is if I can make myself get something a day or two, done a day or two, ahead of when it's supposed to be done,
I'm revising it.
I can't make it.
It always is a better story.
Oh, it always is a better story?
It always is, yeah.
Ah.
Just if I have that last shot, I do like to go through, I think, one final time and scrub it up a little bit with a few paragraphs around it.
And if you are writing really fast on deadline, you do tend to...
use the same words.
I hate that.
I hate to repeat.
And you don't have somebody on the desk because you're reading it?
My wife reads for me.
I would do a hard copy for her.
She's a good editor, got a good eye.
Great.
Challenging me on things.
And I do like to read aloud certain things.
I notice you have bookmarks in there.
Are these for readings?
Yeah.
Are you ever tempted when you're reading to edit yourself?
Do you ever change things?
Yeah, because one thing I've learned about, and I'm a good performer, I'm not playing my own horn, but I really am.
A lot of writers, most fiction writers are not.
I mean, they drone on or whatever.
And the one thing that I've learned is that what might work on the page is
needs to be... I mean, of course I do.
I mean, that phrase was too long, that phrase was too long.
I give myself little diction hints.
That doesn't work if read aloud.
I mean, I make it into... You actually make quite a few changes.
There are a lot of annotations.
Yeah, because I have to... This particular sketch has a lot of dialogue.
And so I've got to use the funny voices.
I've got to be...
Oh, that's great.
These various people.
And so I write myself, basically these are script notes, to remind the performer, this says, sing this line to me.
So while I'm coming down, so I don't... There aren't that many authors who have this degree of confidence.
There aren't.
I mean, I know this for a fact.
And I also know, I also can feel...
I can feel the room hanging on every word.
I mean, I can... This paragraph needed to be entirely cut.
So, yes.
How do you feel about performing?
I love it.
I love that aspect.
See, that goes 180 degrees from some other... Sure.
I mean, I... You believe that there should be a... You know, the reader in the book is a one-on-one thing.
It can be both.
I mean, I would... Given the choice, I would always take a reader over...
Over the opportunity to stand up.
Yeah.
Always.
I mean, if they said, listen, you can publish books until you drop, but you're never going to be able to read in public again.
Fine.
Okay.
You know, that's nothing to negotiate.
But I think that there's another aspect.
I like not to be a public person.
And most of the time, I'm not.
Most of the time, I'm in a room with four walls, seeing no one, not really getting out of my sweatpants ever, with no social life that takes me away from the book or out of the book.
So these few times when I can go from city to city to city and sell this stuff or just kind of be in public sort of carries through
the enormous periods of isolation.
When you go from city to city to city, are you essentially meeting who you perceive to be your readers?
Mostly I meet, well, when I'm doing a reading, I presume that the people who are in the audience are people who care about books.
They've made the effort to come to a bookstore, and
And yes, what happens is they bring their old books of mine, or they've followed me on, you know, they've been reading me for years.
So yes is the answer to that.
But on book tours, the majority of people that I talk to are people that my press officer has
set up for me to have a conversation, which is an unreal conversation.
I mean, were we to meet outside the context of this, we wouldn't be talking at such great length about Iblas Eden.
We'd be talking about what a kick it was to come from a Greek Orthodox family, right?
That's right.
And the fact that my wife happens to be Greek.
Of course she is.
That never happens.
third generation Greek-American marrying.
Oh, yeah.
Oh, got it.
That's my brother's wife is Unitarian.
That's more like it.
That's the norm.
Paul Tsongas' wife is, you know, he's a real professional Greek.
And there's Nick Gage, who's a very good friend of mine, and the neighbor, you know, Nicholas Gage.
I know his work.
Do you know Stratus Javier is here?
I know Stratus very well, yeah.
Because I thought that the Greek book was When the Tree Sings.
That's a wonderful book.
knock me sideways, which takes a completely opposing view to Nick's... I've seen the two together.
As a matter of fact, I think you do see that they were correct proper, but... Oh, yeah.
You know, it's like you don't want to, you really shouldn't have put these people out there.
Oh, Nick, I mean, you know what happened.
I mean, could you have pulled your files out on these guys?
But, you know, I mean, we're adults.
We're civilized peoples.
Oh, but I just didn't, I mean, not when it comes to, I mean, he.
And neither is Nick.
And to tell the truth, I think, I really think that Nick was a little over the top.
but of course his mother was killed.
The guy kills your mother.
I think that to those individuals who say, we're going to Greece, should I read Eleni?
I always say, and if you can get it when the tree sinks, because it's the other part of the story.
I really didn't like, don't quote me on this, but I thought the heroic age, I thought the best thing he did, that was Stratus' second book, you know.
Was that the one with the kid?
That was the kid.
In fact, he had a kid on the jacket.
Yeah, yeah.
I mean, he would go off on a tangent that we would normally be... Huh?
I saw him.
I haven't seen him in a while, either.
He took me completely by surprise.
On my last book tour through, which was for a collection of short stories, I gave a reading somewhere in Cambridge.
I don't even remember where.
And he sat in the back row.
shadow of his former self.
Really?
Really.
He had this hair.
He turned white.
He was very pale.
But he was always a former construction worker.
Yeah, he always looked like he had a sponge diver or something.
And a sadness that was unshakable.
Oh, sorry to hear that.
I said, come back to my hotel.
I'm going to have dinner.
Let Rupert Murdoch pay for our dinner, for heaven's sakes.
I hope everything's okay.
Is everything all right, I hope?
The politics at Harvard, because, you know, he was at Lamont, and they just, you know, they talk to all of those professional, you know, that's one thing that's... I spent a lot of time at Harvard on my book.
My wish was I could get a lot of work over there, and the politics at Harvard are outrageous.
I think they ground him down and ground him down and ground him down, and he hadn't written.
He hasn't written.
He's not... I never thought his poetry was as wonderful as his prose.
Well, that book, When the Tree Sings, was poetry, actually.
It was a little vignette.
It was a mosaic.
It was brilliant.
And we start with the second book, and the pity of what has become the publishing industry is that now it is all too rare that you're going to find it as policy that you buy an author and you expect that the author will learn how to write
through the process of writing, and that when you take an author on, you're not going book to book to book to book, you're going to commit yourself to following this author's career.
It doesn't happen anymore.
I doubt if Simon Schuster would ever pick up a Sprout of Salviaris now, I mean, the first book, because that was strictly a literary book that really had very little hope of a commercial success.
He's not writing, and that's the sadness that I saw in him.
That's really too bad.
I mean, his family is okay, I trust.
Heather was okay, and he had had some kind of operation, something removed.
I mean, you know, you don't want to talk about surgery while you're, you know, tugging into your pasta.
But the point was, it was a very odd thing for me because I had this whole Rishti thing had happened, and I hadn't seen him.
And then when I see him, he starts telling me about how terrible his life had been.
I'm so sorry to hear that.
He's actually reading.
When the inspiration freezes up, it's as though you're speaking to someone who's behind a veil.
If you don't mind talking briefly about what that whole Rushdie thing did to your John Dollar book, I mean, you talk about that.
Harbour Collins printed... Listen, let's put this in perspective, for God's sake.
Here I am on a book tour.
I'm read, I'm not out of print, and I'm not under the threat of death.
So the fact that John Dollar just basically got remaindered almost immediately is...
is not a crisis in any way.
So we're putting it in perspective.
Yeah, absolutely.
I mean, this is not a lament on my part.
And I asked the question.
Yeah, and I didn't lead with it.
But, I mean, what happened, HarperCollins, let me just give you the
the industry nuts and bolts of it, was that they printed 50,000 expecting that it was going to win their lead title.
Oh, there's a lot of publicity on it.
It was the cover of their catalog.
It was a great jacket, great art, I thought.
Huge stuff, and no author.
And I think I ended up selling maybe half of their printing, and the rest was immediately remaindered.
Because I didn't have, I mean, that was the book that was going to make me.
That was the breakthrough.
The breakthrough book.
And no author.
So consequently, when I went to negotiate a new contract for the new book, my figures weren't strong.
My figures were terrible.
My reviews were wonderful.
I mean, Dollar was a critical angel.
I mean, it won me the Whiting.
It won me the Costco.
I mean, just wonderful, wonderful stuff.
But no numbers.
And so when I went in, and I've got to pay my rent, you know.
So when we negotiated the new contract, I got paid half.
what I had been paid for dollar.
So they did base it on the numbers for that?
Oh, they do.
Absolutely.
Publishing has become a bottom-line industry.
When you do this, and I think it's an important book and you have to do it, go to some Catherine's Monastery in the Sinai.
Oh, I've got to.
It's the kind of thing I'm looking for.
It's the Greek Orthodox Monastery.
And they have there the
In Arabic, the Laissez-Passe is through the... One was signed by Muhammad.
This is the stuff.
And they've got... It's a room like this.
It looks like a school gym.
You walk in, you've got... A thousand-year-old manuscripts.
A thousand-year-old manuscripts with no sprinkler system.
And because they have no money.
And it was supported basically through the Russian Orthodox people.
I want to go to the Vatican Library.
I want to go to St.
Petersburg.
This is just for one opening chapter that will be... The other thing that will help get you in there, and I don't know how strong your credentials are, but if you do have a book contract, that will help you get into these places.
The response my book is getting right now is... I had a full-page review in the Washington Post, a full page in the New York Times.
I really did, at least, and it hasn't been a bad review of it.
The pissiest review I got was from Publishers Weekly, if you can believe it.
They're not consistent.
And also, they're all 23 years old.
Yeah, and they're only getting 20 bucks to write the review, probably.
So tell me briefly now, are you an American writer in your view, I guess?
Yeah, yes.
I've never thought of myself as anything other than that.
To get back to the book, which is why we're here.
My problem is that I somehow have been transplanted in the mind of the public who don't read me.
I mean, they sort of think of me as, oh, his wife over there, English.
So I almost have to make a point.
I've never felt that I've been anything other than an American writer because I write with American themes.
I write about the individual against landscape and that broader canvas of world events or whatever.
And that's an American theme.
The English don't write novels like that.
The English write salon books.
And so I'm definitely an American writer through and through.
It's just that I don't set my novel in the United States.
So apart from, and I'm not asking you about your relationship with someone that's personal, but from a professional standpoint, has it had a negative effect on your career?
Oh, yeah, absolutely.
Because the people who became conscious of Marianne Wiggins being a familiar name were...
have slotted me into... They weren't going to read me anyway.
I mean, it doesn't help.
If I were a personality or a celebrity by virtue of my marriage, i.e.
a political wife, that would be one thing.
But I have never been that.
And so there's all this white noise that goes on in most conversations like this one.
I'd much rather be talking about
My books, my work, or writers in general.
And instead, I get all of this... This question inevitably comes up, doesn't it?
It inevitably comes up.
And when quoted... And I have to ask it, too.
No, you have to... And when quoted, I sound graceless.
Can I use that quote?
What you're saying right now?
Oh, sure.
Because we've had this over an hour animated conversation...
You've seen, you know, that, you know, you've seen who I am and what I am, and inevitably what happens with the press is that they will take the one thing I say about someone and leave with that, and... And I'm lucky that when I'm not referred to, when it isn't referred to, I'm lucky.
But most of the time, I mean, I think that now I've got a sense of humor about it.
New York Magazine highlighted...
Good Reads for the Fall.
And they led their push for Iblis Eden by saying, ex fatwa codependent Wiggins.
And I thought, well, you know, that pretty much, I mean, there's no other woman in the world who could meet that.
But it was like they reached for race.
But I have to tell you, you know, I love it years after the fact.
Listen, would you inscribe our book?
We probably have something coming up.
I've got a 1215 with God knows what.
Well, then you're almost there.
So is there anything I should have asked you that I didn't?
I don't know.
I'll give you my card.
Want my card?
Yes.
Because...
Also, I'll tell Jane, if you do come to London... I will.
I'm coming.
Let's go meet in the British Museum.
Yeah, it really would be.
It really would be.
And I want to take you to the... There are two Greek communities in London.
One, of course, is the Greek community, and one, of course, is the Greek community.